General:

The game will be an empire-scale 4X game, similar to Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri, Pandora: First Contact, or Call to Power 2.
There will be at least five layers in the game: ocean trench, seafloor, ocean shelf, sea level, and orbital.
The game map will be made up of square tiles transformed into a torus that behaves like a sphere, similar to the SphereTest mod for MineTest.

Cities:
Resources may be harvested at each layer, but cannot be convoyed to the city unless there is a road connection.
Resources may not be convoyed to a city if the distance from the city exceeds 2 tiles. This distance limit does not carry over between layers.
Cities have a population limit that may be raised by building facilities and researching technologies.
The amount of resources harvested is proportional to the city's population: for example, a city with a total of 10 resources and a population of 1 may only receive 1/10 of the total resources, or 1 resource.
Workers are not assigned to tiles manually. Instead, all resources with a road connection to the city are taken into account, then scaled by the total population of the city.
Workers may riot. Rioting workers are subtracted from the population when calculating tile output. For example, a city with a population of 10/10 and 10 food, minerals, and credits but 2 rioting workers would only receive 80% of each resource: 8 food, 8 minerals, and 8 credits.
Rioting workers may be nerve stapled under certain forms of government.
Each resource harvested has the population modifier applied to it individually. For example, if a city with a population of 5/10 could harvest 10 food, 5 energy, and 20 minerals, then it will receive 5 food, 3 energy, and 10 minerals.
After reaching full population, each additional population unit can harvest additional resources beyond what the tiles allow: for example, a city with 10 resources and a population of 15 may receive a 10% bonus on resources for each population unit past 10, or 15 total resources.
Tiles in different layers cannot be joined with a road connection directly; the tiles in one layer must first be connected to a transporter, which then connects to the city directly above or below.
Transporters share resources with cities and other transporters directly above and below them.
Building a transporter above or below a city may unlock new city facilities for construction.
Transporters may be upgraded to cities by building the appropriate facilities. Upgrading a transporter raises the population limit.
Cities and transporters along the same vertical axis function as one unit. Only one facility or unit may be produced by one city/transporter axis at the same time. Units appear in the appropriate layer when construction is complete.
Floating cities may be moved to another tile. While moving, all production and resource output is temporarily suspended.

Terraforming:
Terraforming is performed on tiles adjacent to a city tile or another terraformed tile connected to a city by other terraformed tiles.
Structures represent structures that behave like modules connected to the city.
There are four types of structures: industrial, transportation, military, and miscellaneous.
Industrial structures modify tile resource output.
Transportation structures increase the movement speed of any units moving between two tiles with transportation structures.
Military structures modify fog of war, attack bonuses, defense bonuses, and provide other effects.
Miscellaneous structures include transporters and habitation domes, and generally provide bonuses to their respective cities similar to a facility.
Structures must be connected to a city tile, either directly or indirectly.
Structures of different classes may stack. For example, transportation structures like roads may stack on top of industrial structures like hydrocultures.

Structures must be built by aquaformer/aeroformer.
Structures have no intial cost nor upkeep.
There are more resources in layers more distant from sea level, but the infrastructure and technology required to exploit these is more expensive.
Cities and transporters may be built in ocean trenches, on the ocean floor, at sea level, and in orbit.
Terraforming may be automated using per-tile or per-city rules.
Terraforms may be performed automatically in Plan Mode by assigning a terraform to each tile and allowing the game's artificial intelligence to assign aquaformers automatically.
Terraforms may be performed manually by placing an aquaformer on a tile and assigning it a command.

Facilities:
Facilities provide passive bonuses to city resource outputs.
Facilities have an initial cost in minerals and an upkeep cost in credits.
A global build queue can be created in each game by clicking a button (Add to Global Build Queue). Facilities in the queue will be automatically built at every base in the same sequence.
The global build queue can be turned on or off for any base individually or for every base at the same time.
The global build queue can automatically hurry production on facilities where the hurry cost is less than a player-specified threshold.

Units:
The player will be able to design their own units, choosing a chassis, weapon or equipment module, reactor, and special ability.
There will be vehical chassis particular to each layer in the game, as well as chassis capable of traveling between two or more layers.
Units may be garrisonned within a city to defend against attack.
Units may function as police, preventing riots and emigration if the player's society modules permit this.
Units may be assigned to a fleet, in which case they will move and receive orders in unison, but no quicker than the speed of the slowest unit.
At the beginning of each turn, all military units must move before any non-military units.

Technology:
The technology tree will allow the player to unlock additional technologies.
New technologies will allow the construction of new base facilities, vehicles, and tile improvements; they will also confer passive bonuses.

Combat:
All units have four statistics: attack, defense, movement, and health.
Special abilities, terrain, morale, and demographics may modify military effectiveness.
The attacking unit's attack*health is compared to the defending unit's defense*health.
Only one of the units involved in a battle may survive; stalemates are not possible.
When combat is initiated, each unit takes turns attacking the other unit, doing damage proportional to the attack or defense statistic used. Combat ends when one unit's health reaches 0.
Units may stack.
The unit in a stack with the highest defense will defend all other units.
Units may be grouped into fleets which move in unison.

Government:
Governments may be built from three distinct categories: politics, economics, and values.
The forms of government available will change as new technologies are unlocked.
Each society module offers a distinct modifier to a different gameplay mechanic: for example, fascism may confer an industry bonus while penalizing scientific output.

Demographics:
The population will be composed of many distinct ideological groups, which confer modifiers on different gameplay mechanics.
The player's gameplay decisions will alter their population's ideological beliefs.
The strength of each modifier is proportional to the amount of the population that holds the corresponding ideology.
Not all modifiers are linear: for example, if Individualists exceed 75% of the population, economic output may be reduced.
Each demographic group has an opposite.
Low MORALE and ECONOMY both cause demographic groups to become more fragmented and extreme.
MORALE and ECONOMY from society modules, facilities, units, and tile improvements are calculated first, and these values are then modified by demographic groups to produce the final values.
The final MORALE and ECONOMY calculations are used to determine how demographic groups develop; this may cause feedback resulting in cascading changes.
Extreme demographic groups confer worse modifiers than standard demographic groups.
High MORALE will cause existing demographic groups to gradually convert to groups corresponding to the player's society module choices.
Extremist groups take longer to convert to desirable groups.
//Demographic groups only provide bonuses if the player's society module choices align with their values.

POPULATION:
Population grows at a rate proportional to the product of ECONOMY and MORALE.
Population growth is limited by food.
Surplus food has no effect on population growth.
Population growth may be modified directly by society module choices.

AGRICULTURE:
Additional FOOD beyond what is necessary for population growth has no effect on population growth.
Surplus food is stockpiled up to a maximum determined by the facilities constructed in the city.
Surplus food can be shared between cities with a road connection if any city in a network is suffering from a food shortfall.
Surplus food cannot be shared between cities if the road connection is blocked by an enemy combat unit.
Agriculture bonuses allow more food to be harvested.

INDUSTRY:
Industry represents the skill of the player's labor force.
Industry is proportional to how quickly facilities, units, and tile improvements may be completed.
Industry does not affect the amount of minerals harvested per tile.
Industry is not affected by ECONOMY directly.
Additional minerals beyond what is necessary for facility construction have no effect on construction speed.
Construction may be accelerated for credits.
Multiple facilities may be built concurrently if enough minerals are available for each. For example, if one facility requires 10 min/turn and and another requires 20 min/turn, both may be completed on time if the city is harvesting 30 min/turn.
Facilities may be built using minerals from a stockpile. For example, a base with 30 minerals on hold but harvesting 0 minerals/turn may complete a facility that takes 30 minerals at 10 minerals/turn in 3 turns.
Minerals may be shared between bases with a road connection that is not blockaded.

ECONOMY:
Economy is proportional the amount of credits harvested per tile.
Cities receive an additional economy bonus proportional the number of cities of the same faction with a road connection to them. The road connection does not have to be direct; as long as there is a path to the city by road, the city will be factored into the calculation.
The economy bonus a city receives when connected to another city attenuates exponentially with the distance of the shortest path connecting them.
Trade bonuses may be blocked if the road connection is occupied by an enemy unit.
Cities of other factions are also factored into the trade bonus if they have a road connection and if diplomatic relations are in good standing.
Cities of differing factions that are at war receive no trade bonuses.
Trade bonuses with cities of other factions are proportional to the  economy of the faction with the least-free market. For example, if a Laissez-Faire (1.00) society trades with a Mixed (0.75) society, both will receive 75% of the maximum bonus.
Trade bonuses are proportional to the product of the two cities' ECONOMY before trade modifiers.
Factions may invest in cities if the target city's economic system allows for this.
Factions may take over cities by acquiring 3/5 ownership.
Cities may regularly import resources from other factions.
The price of imported resources may fluctuate with supply, demand, and blockades.
Cities may only sell resources that they have on hand.
The player may set the price at which they sell resources.
Resources are automatically purchased at the lowest price available.
Factions may issue embargoes.

SCIENCE:
Science is not harvested like FOOD and MINERALS.
Science is produced only by cities and facilities.
Science is funded by credits.
Facilities may increase the per-credit effiency of scientific research.
Modifiers to SCIENCE alter the efficiency of credits allocated to science. For example, a Biology Lab may multiply credits toward research by 1.25.
The amount of credits put into SCIENCE rather than held on reserve can be modified by a slider.

Interface:
The player may have simple conversations with the advisors for each gameplay mechanic.
Conversations with advisors sometimes reveal the effects of a certain technology on the player's society.
Hotkeys will be available for all menu options.
Hotkeys will be prominently displayed.
An extensive in-game documentation system will be available with links to entries featured prominently in the interface, similar to Alpha Centauri.
Clicking on a base will zoom in, visually showing all of the base's facilities and surrounding structures.
The player may switch between a base's different layers when on the base control screen.

Multiplayer:
Turns will be simultaneous.
